*** Discrete Sampling Practice ***

---> Creating useful functions <---

(1) Write a function that multiplies all consecutively decreasing numbers between a maximum and a minimum supplied as arguments. (Like a factorial, but not necessarily going all the way to 1). This calculation would look like

max * max-1 * max-2 * ... * min

(2) Using the function you wrote in (1), write a function that calculates the binomial coefficient (see Definition 1.4.12 in the probability reading). Actually, do this twice. The first time (2a) calculate all factorials fully. Now re-write the function and cancel as many terms as possible so you can avoid unnecessary multiplication (see the middle expression in Theorem 1.4.13).

(3) Try calculating different binomial coefficients using both the functions from (2a) and (2b) for different values of n and k. Try some really big values there is a noticeable difference in speed between the (2a) and (2b) function. Which one is faster? By roughly how much?

(4) Use either function (2a) or (2b) to write a function that calculates the probability of k successes in n Bernoulli trials with probability p. This is called the Binomial(n,p) distribution. See Theorem 3.3.5 for the necessary equation. [Hint: pow(x,y) returns x^y (x raised to the power of y).]

(5) Now write a function to sample from an arbitrary discrete distribution. This function should take two arguments. The first is a list of arbitrarily labeled events and the second is a list of probabilities associated with these events. Obviously, these two lists should be the same length.

---> Sampling sites from an alignment <---

Imagine that you have a multiple sequence alignment with two kinds of sites. One type of site pattern supports the monophyly of taxon A and taxon B. The second type supports the monophyly of taxon A and taxon C.

(6) For an alignment of 400 sites, with 200 sites of type 1 and 200 of type 2, sample a new alignment (a new set of site pattern counts) with replacement from the original using your function from (5). Print out the counts of the two types.

(7) Repeat (6) 100 times and store the results in a list.

(8) Of those 100 trials, summarize how often you saw particular proportions of type 1 vs. type 2. 

(9) Calculate the probabilities of the proportions you saw in (8) using the binomial probability mass function (PMF) from (4).

(10) Compare your results from (8) and (9).

(11) Repeat 7-10, but use 10,000 trials.




